Docs/data model (#5478)
holochain/holochain: docs/design/data_model.md

| _tag_ | `LinkTag` | Arbitrary bytes for application-defined link metadata. |

Link tags have a maximum size of 1 KB (1,000 bytes). This limit is enforced during validation to ensure tags can be efficiently stored and used for filtering queries.

#### _DeleteLink_

| Property | Rust Type | Description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|
| _base address_ | `AnyLinkableHash` | The base from the _CreateLink_ being deleted. |
| _link add address_ | `ActionHash` | The address of the _CreateLink_ action being deleted. |

The _base address_ allows _DeleteLink_ actions to be grouped with _CreateLink_ actions from the same base. The link add address associates the _DeleteLink_ action with a specific _CreateLink_ action.

### Entry Types

Holochain defines four entry types that serve different purposes in the system. Entries represent the actual data content stored in a record.

#### Agent

The _Agent_ entry type contains an agent's public key. An action with this entry type is created automatically during genesis as the third action on every source chain. Further _Agent_ entries are permitted to be created, if that has some meaning assigned by the application.

> 

Author: Fixed

*Size limitation:* _App_ entries have a maximum size of 4 MB (4,000,000 bytes). This limit is enforced automatically by Holochain. Should an application need to store larger pieces of data, they may consider splitting it across multiple entries or storing references to external content.

##### CapGrant

The _CapGrant_ entry type is a system entry for granting capabilities to other agents. Capabilities allow fine-grained control over who can call specific zome functions.

A CapGrant entry contains:
- _Tag_: A string identifier for this grant.
- _Access_: The access level, one of _Unrestricted_, _Transferable_, or _Assigned_.
- _Functions_: The set of zome functions this grant permits.
- _Secret_: For _Transferable_ and _Assigned_ grants, a secret that must be provided.
- _Assignees_: For _Assigned_ grants, the list of authorized agent public keys.

Access levels:
- _Unrestricted_: Any agent can exercise this capability, without a secret
- _Transferable_: A secret must be provided, but any agent with the secret can use it.

> - _Assigned_: Requires both a secret and authorization, defined by the calling agent being in the assignees list.

Author: We've decided to move cap claims off the chain, they don't belong there. There's an open discussion about cap grants above that we'll resolve separately.

#### ChainIntegrityWarrant

The _ChainIntegrityWarrant_ is currently the only type of warrant operation. It provides evidence that an agent has violated chain integrity rules.

**Warrant contents:**
- **Proof**: The evidence of wrongdoing (one of two types below)
- **Author**: The agent who discovered the violation and issued the warrant
- **Timestamp**: When the warrant was issued
- **Warrantee**: The agent who committed the violation
- **Signature**: The warrant author's signature over the warrant

**Authority:** Agent public key of the warrantee (the agent who committed the violation)

**Types of chain integrity violations:**

1. **InvalidChainOp**
   - Contains: The invalid action (hash and signature), the action's author, and the chain op type that was being validated.
   - Proves: An agent authored an action that fails validation rules.
   - Example: An _Create_ action with an entry that contains an application-defined `user_name` field that is supposed to be restricted to 30 characters, but is actually 70.

2. **ChainFork**

>    - Contains: Two actions with the same sequence number (both with hashes and signatures) and their author.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Contains: Two otherwise valid actions with the same sequence number (both with hashes and signatures) and their author.
```

I see that sequence number is a stand in for prev_hash here. I don't think it matters which we're checking as long as we're also ensuring the sequence numbers matches the hash chain position

Author: No you're right, this is actually checked with `prev_hash`. It's just the warrant itself that uses sequence numbers but the detection is correctly done with a hash.

Does it matter if the actions are valid? I'd suggest that it's valid to have both a chain fork and invalid op warrant against the same action?

# Holochain Data Model Design

## Overview

This document describes the data model used by Holochain for representing and persisting application data.

## Core Concepts

### Agent

> An _Agent_ is any entity which can exercise the property of agency within a Holochain network. In practice, this refers to a participant in a distributed application who can author data, validate the actions of others, and participate in the peer-to-peer network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An _Agent_ is any entity which can exercise the property of agency within a Holochain network. In practice, this refers to a participant in a distributed application who can author cryptographically signed data, validate the actions of others, and participate in the peer-to-peer network.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _Agent_ is any entity which can exercise the property of agency within a Holochain network. In practice, this refers to a participant in a distributed application who can author Actions, validate the Actions of others, and participate in the peer-to-peer network.
```

Each agent is identified by an _AgentPubKey_, which is the public half of a cryptographic signing key pair. While called a "key", it functions as an identity hash within the system.

### Action

> An _Action_ is the fundamental unit of authorship in Holochain. Actions form a hash chain (a.k.a "source chain") that provides an immutable, tamper-evident record of everything an agent has done. Actions come in several types, each of which carries semantic meaning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _Action_ is the fundamental unit of authorship in Holochain. Actions form a hash chain (a.k.a "source chain") that provides an immutable, tamper-evident record of everything an Agent has done. Actions come in several types, each of which carries semantic meaning.
```

> An _Action_ is the fundamental unit of authorship in Holochain. Actions form a hash chain (a.k.a "source chain") that provides an immutable, tamper-evident record of everything an agent has done. Actions come in several types, each of which carries semantic meaning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _Action_ is the fundamental unit of authorship in Holochain. All Actions authored by the same Agent form a hash chain (a.k.a "source chain") that provides an immutable, tamper-evident record of everything an Agent has done. Actions come in several types, each of which carries semantic meaning and has different restrictions.
```

### Entry

An _Entry_ is application data that can be stored in Holochain. Entries represent the actual content that applications work with, while actions are defined by the system and 

> describe how the entry data should be interpreted.

Reviewer: An Action includes the `entry_type`, which tells you how to deserialize the entry blob into a data structure.

### Record

> A _Record_ is the combination of an action, signed by the agent who authored it, together with its associated entry if applicable. Records are the primary unit of data that applications query and work with.

Reviewer: I would also like terms capitalized and backticked (I'll stop doing inline suggestions for this request).

The entry part of a record exists in one of multiple states. An entry may be _present_ when the entry data is included with the action. It may be _hidden_ when the entry exists but is marked as private and therefore not shared. Some action types don't permit an entry at all, in which case the entry is _not applicable_. Finally, an action may be stored without its entry by agents other than the author, resulting in a _not stored_ state.

### Chain DHT Operations

> Represent chain data being shared with the network. Each action generates a specific set of chain operations (such as _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_, _StoreEntry_, etc.) that enable different authorities to store and index the data for efficient queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contains a Record and a validation type that is shared with the network as a distinct data blob. Each action generates a specific set of chain operations (such as _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_, _StoreEntry_, etc.) that enable different authorities to store and index different parts of the Record for efficient queries, as well as to execute different parts of the overall validation logic only when dependency data can be efficiently queried.
```

### Warrant Operations

Represent evidence of invalid behavior by an agent. When an agent detects that another agent has violated validation rules or forked their chain, they can issue a warrant containing cryptographic proof of the violation. Warrants are routed to the violating agent's activity authority, creating a permanent, queryable record of the misbehavior.

### Location

> A location is a derived property of a hash. The exact algorithm is not important, as long as it preserves the uniqueness of its hash and all peers are using the same algorithm. The location value is an unsigned 32-bit number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A location is an unsigned 32-bit number that is derived from a hash. The exact algorithm is not important, as long as it preserves the uniqueness of its hash and all peers are using the same algorithm.
```

> A location is a derived property of a hash. The exact algorithm is not important, as long as it preserves the uniqueness of its hash and all peers are using the same algorithm. The location value is an unsigned 32-bit number.

Reviewer: "preserves the uniqueness of the hash" is a bit unclear language since we're reducing the 32-byte hash to 32-bits thereby significantly reducing its uniqueness.

## Actions taken by an agent

### Action types

> There are 8 action types: _Dna_, _AgentValidationPkg_, _InitZomesComplete_, _Create_, _Update_, _Delete_, _CreateLink_, _DeleteLink_. The following sections describe their semantic meaning.

Reviewer: Missing CloseChain and OpenChain -- I assume that is intentional?

Author: Correct, they're not properly implemented and it's not clear whether they're necessary yet. The way I'd like to achieve DNA updates looks a little different.

#### Genesis

When an agent first joins a DNA network, their source chain must be initialized through a process called _genesis_. Genesis creates the first three actions on every source chain.

> The genesis actions are:

Author: That's an interesting point, I don't know of a reason no

1. _Dna_ (sequence 0) - Records the DNA hash of the application this agent is joining.
2. _AgentValidationPkg_ (sequence 1) - Contains the agent's public key and optional membrane proof for network validation.
3. _Create_ (sequence 2) - Creates an _Agent_ typed entry, containing the agent's public key.

These three genesis actions are created automatically by the system during the genesis workflow. The _Dna_ and _AgentValidationPkg_ actions cannot be created through application code, only queried. The _Create_ action with an _Agent_ typed entry can be created by an application but has special meaning in this location.

> The _Dna_ action declares what application data model and validation rules the agent is using. The _AgentValidationPkg_ and _Create_ actions "announce" the agent to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _Dna_ action declares what application data model, validation rules, and network identifier the agent is using. The _AgentValidationPkg_ and _Create_ actions "announce" the agent to
```

the network and set up the expectation that all further actions on this chain will be signed by this agent.

#### Initialisation

After genesis completes successfully, an application is allowed to perform initialization steps. This may optionally choose to create actions of other types, to be described below. Once initialization is complete, an _InitZomesComplete_ action is appended to signal that the agent is ready to participate in the network.

> The _InitZomesComplete_ is required to guarantee that the application's initialisation steps are only run once. This is because, to Holochain, initialisation actions are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _InitZomesComplete_ is required to guarantee that the application's post-genesis initialisation Actions are committed only once. This is because, to Holochain, initialisation Actions are
```

A _Delete_ action must reference either a _Create_ or an _Update_ action.

Holochain does not implicitly describe how applications should process deletes.

#### Linking data

The _CreateLink_ and _DeleteLink_ actions provide a mechanism for creating directed, typed relationships between entities. Links allow applications to build graph structures, indexes, and navigable relationships without embedding references directly in entry data.

##### _CreateLink_

The _CreateLink_ action creates a directed link from a base hash to a target hash. These hashes may be of any type, including hashes of actions, entries, agent public keys or even custom hashes. Links are first-class data in Holochain, stored on the agent's source chain as an action.

The base hash is how links are grouped, so that all links from the same base hash, with the same type, are considered a set.

##### _DeleteLink_

The _DeleteLink_ action marks a previously created link as deleted. Like entry deletes, link deletes do not remove the original _CreateLink_ action — they add metadata indicating the link should no longer be considered active.

> Unlike for entries, Holochain should automatically consider *DeleteLink_s when fetching links. It should still be possible to retrieve the set of create and delete link actions so that the application can decide what the current set should be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike for entries, Holochain should automatically consider _DeleteLink_s when fetching links. It should still be possible to retrieve the set of create and delete link actions so that the application can decide what the current set should be.
```

| _action sequence_ | `u32` | The sequence number of this action in the chain, starting from 0. Sequence number is precisely 1 greater than that of the _previous action_ it points at. |
| _previous action_ | `ActionHash` | The hash of the previous action in the chain, creating the hash-chain structure. |

The _Dna_ action is special. It is always the first action on a chain, so it has no previous action and implicitly has sequence number 0. It does have an author and timestamp.

The following sections describe the additional properties that each action type has.

#### Dna

| Property | Rust Type | Description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|
| _hash_ | `DnaHash` | The hash of the DNA this chain is running. |

#### AgentValidationPkg

| Property | Rust Type | Description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|
| _membrane proof_ | `Option<MembraneProof>` | Optional proof required for network entry, if this DNA supports it. |

#### InitZomesComplete

No additional properties, this is a marker action.

#### Create

| Property | Rust Type | Description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|

> | _entry type_ | `EntryType` | The type of entry being created, which are defined below. |

Author: That's not correct, `EntryType::App` is just one of the entry types

| _entry hash_ | `EntryHash` | Hash of the entry content. |

_App_ entry types must be uniquely identifiable within a DNA to enable correct deserialization. Each _App_ entry type is identified an index:

- _Zome index_: An 8-bit index identifying which integrity zome defines this entry type
- _Entry definition index_: An 8-bit index identifying which entry type within that zome

Together, these two indices form a unique key for each entry type in the DNA. This indexing strategy ensures that entry data can be correctly deserialized to its original type even when accessed in the future. The indices are stable identifiers — once assigned to an entry definition, they must remain consistent for the lifetime of the DNA to maintain data readability.

#### Update

| Property | Rust Type | Description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|

> | _updates address_ | `ActionHash` | Hash of the _Create_ action being updated. |

Author: Discussion above

| _entry type_ | `EntryType` | The type of the new entry. |
| _entry hash_ | `EntryHash` | Hash of the new entry content. |

The _updates address_ allows _Update_ actions to be grouped with the _Create_ action that they update.

#### Delete

| Property | Rust Type | Description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|
| _deletes address_ | `ActionHash` | Hash of the _Create_ or _Update_ action being deleted. |
| _deletes entry address_ | `EntryHash` | Hash of the entry being deleted. |

The _deletes address_ allows _Delete_ actions to be grouped with the _Create_ actions that they delete.

#### _CreateLink_

| Property | Rust Type | Description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|
| _base address_ | `AnyLinkableHash` | The base address of the link, its "from" address |
| _target address_ | `AnyLinkableHash` | The target address of the link, its "to" address. |
| _zome index_ | `ZomeIndex` | Which integrity zome defines this link type. | <!-- TODO implementation leak, should be contained within a "link type" but the link type is user defined... seems like it could be merged together with a little care -->
| _link type_ | `LinkType` | Application-defined link type identifier. |

> | _tag_ | `LinkTag` | Arbitrary bytes for link metadata or filtering. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| _tag_ | `LinkTag` | Arbitrary bytes for application-defined link metadata. |
```

All fields can be filtered by. Might we worth noting in another line.

> Link tags have a maximum size of 1000 bytes. This limit is enforced during validation to ensure tags can be efficiently stored and used for filtering queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Link tags have a maximum size of 1 kilobyte. This limit is enforced during validation to ensure tags can be efficiently stored and used for filtering queries.
```

### Entry Types

Holochain defines four entry types that serve different purposes in the system. Entries represent the actual data content stored in a record.

##### Agent

The _Agent_ entry type contains an agent's public key. An action with this entry type is created automatically during genesis as the third action on every source chain. Further _Agent_ entries are permitted to be created, if that has some meaning assigned by the application.

##### App

The _App_ entry type represents serialized, application-defined data. This is the most common entry type and contains arbitrary data structured according to the application's needs.

Applications create _App_ entries using _Create_ actions and can update or delete them using _Update_ and _Delete_ actions. The content and structure of _App_ entries is entirely determined by the application.

*Size limitation:* _App_ entries have a maximum size of 4 MB (4,000,000 bytes). This limit is enforced automatically by Holochain. Should an application need to store larger pieces of data, they may consider splitting it across multiple entries or storing references to external content.

> ##### CapGrant

Reviewer 3: There have been conversations whether caps should be added to the chain. Also regarding migrations of DNAs, I'd like to consider the possibility of storing them in a separate table and not consider them actions. I don't see how it should matter to other agents who gets access to my chain.

Author: For now, I've removed cap claim but not cap grant, pending discussion

Author: I think unrestricted or delegated access is valid to share with the network and that might be something that applications would do themselves anyway. I think the benefit of removing cap grants from the chain isn't a worthwhile trade-off right now. It's extra work and I don't believe it's a bad thing for them to be there. Let's just stick with removing cap claims from the chain, they really are a local "note to self"

- _Functions_: The set of zome functions this grant permits.
- _Secret_: For _Transferable_ and _Assigned_ grants, a secret that must be provided.
- _Assignees_: For _Assigned_ grants, the list of authorized agent public keys.

Access levels:
- _Unrestricted_: Any agent can exercise this capability, without a secret
- _Transferable_: A secret must be provided, but any agent with the secret can use it.
- _Assigned_: Requires both a secret and authorization, defined by the calling agent being in the assignees list.

##### CapClaim

The _CapClaim_ entry type is for claiming capabilities that have been granted. When an agent receives a capability granted by another agent, they may create a _CapClaim_ entry on their chain.

A _CapClaim_ entry contains:
- _Tag_: A string identifier for this capability claim.
- _Grantor_: The agent public key of the agent who issued the grant.
- _Secret_: The secret required to exercise the capability.

_CapClaim_ entries are private since they may contain secrets. They serve as a record that the agent possesses a particular capability and provide the information needed to exercise it when making zome calls.

> ## DHT Operations

Author: I have spent a lot of time thinking about this over the years now. I'm reasonably confident in the design, it's the implementation that needs the most work as far as I know. Of course there could be problems hiding but I don't expect them to be so fundamental that we'll back ourselves into a corner that we can find a way out of.

> ## DHT Operations

Author: Perhaps it helps if we don't call this document set in stone when it's merged. My intention was to have a record of what's being build that matches the code. All other references are incomplete and inaccurate at this point. If we work towards having the code match this document, I'd be happy and that's the main thing that I'm after in this review, is whether the document seems like a reasonable goal based on our best understanding. If the design has to be extended to make some aspect of validation work then so be it. If we've reached 1.0 by the time we realize the problem then perhaps Holochain 2.0 will have to be a more secure version, and we'll have to do what we can with state management and database migration to evolve within the 1.x series. To me this is better than not having a design, even if we don't get it all right. We did our best and have a reference to go back to when there are questions in the implementation.

> ## DHT Operations

Reviewer: I think this document is a big step forward.

I see that sharding may be too deep of a rabbit hole to interrogate here. If we're not ready to interrogate it and have high confidence in the design for 1.0, then it should still be considered unstable.

If we still consider it unstable, I'd like to note it in the doc that DHT Ops exist specifically for it.

Holochain also has a distributed data model, of DHT Operations (ops) that form each DNA's Distributed Hash Table (DHT). These are what get shared on the network and validated. Ops come in two different groups, chain ops and warrant ops.

> When an agent creates a record on their source chain, that data is then made available on the DNA's Distributed Hash Table (DHT) as DHT chain operations (ops). Holochain's primary data model of actions, entries and records is already content addressible, and the op model adds metadata to describe Holochain's sharding model. Sharding works by distributing data across peers in the network, with enough structure to enable efficient data retrieval.

Author: This goes outside the data model and describes operational aspects of how the model is used in practice. I'm concerned if these documents aren't kept focused then it will be necessary to update multiple when we make changes. There is information elsewhere about authorities.

### Op locations

> A location is computed for each `AgentPubKey`. That location is the agent's location on the network. Each agent stores some number of data locations, starting from their location, up to the maximum size of a location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A location is derived from each `AgentPubKey`. That location is the agent's location on the network. Each agent stores some number of data locations, starting from their location, up to the maximum size of a location.
```

Author: The location is part of the `AgentPubKey`, which contains both a type, hash and location

| Op group | Op type | Authority | Location source |
|----------|---------|-----------|----------|
| Chain | _RegisterAgentActivity_ | Agent | Agent address |
| | _StoreRecord_ | Record | Action address |
| | _RegisterUpdateRecord_ | Record | Original action address |
| | _RegisterDeleteRecord_ | Record | Original action address |
| | _StoreEntry_ | Entry | Entry address |
| | _RegisterUpdateEntry_ | Entry | Original entry address |
| | _RegisterDeleteEntry_ | Entry | Original entry address |
| | _RegisterLink_ | Link | Action address, from the link's base |

> | | _RegisterDeleteLink_ | Link | Action address, from the deleted link's base |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| | _RegisterDeleteLink_ | Link | Deleted Link's base address |
```

| Warrant | _InvalidChainOp_ | Agent | Agent address of the agent who authored invalid data |
| | _ChainFork_ | Agent | Agent address of the agent who forked their chain |

The transformation from source chain actions to DHT operations serves several purposes:

> **Selective distribution:** Different authorities receive only the data they need to perform their role. The entry authority receives the entry content, while the agent activity authority receives only the action without the entry.

Reviewer 3: I think there should be another table or a section in each Chain op type that describes what is included with the op, e.g. `StoreRecord` includes the record, `RegisterLink` includes the record, but `RegisterAgentActivity` only includes the action.

Reviewer 3: clear enough!

### Chain ops

Each action type is mapped to a specific set of DHT operations. This happens after committing to a source chain but the mapping can be done at any later point and still be valid. The following table shows which operations are generated for each action:

| Action Type | Ops Produced |
|-------------|---------------------|
| **Dna** | _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_ |
| **AgentValidationPkg** | _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_ |
| **InitZomesComplete** | _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_ |
| **Create** | _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_, _StoreEntry_ |
| **Update** | _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_, _StoreEntry_, _RegisterUpdateRecord_, _RegisterUpdateEntry_ |
| **Delete** | _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_, _RegisterDeleteRecord_, _RegisterDeleteEntry_ |
| **CreateLink** | _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_, _RegisterLink_ |
| **DeleteLink** | _StoreRecord_, _RegisterAgentActivity_, _RegisterDeleteLink_ |

Note that every action produces a:

> - _StoreRecord_ op meaning that every action is content addressible by its own action hash, and

Reviewer: There are several of these spellings - can search and replace.

> - _RegisterAgentActivity_, which meaning that every action is sent to the author's authorities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- _RegisterAgentActivity_,  meaning that every action is sent to the author's authorities.
```

> Each chain op contains the source action, and a signature of that action by its author. Note that the entry data is not signed, but entries are always referenced by their hash by an action so the signature of the action covers the entry data as long as the entry hash is checked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each chain op contains the source action, and a signature of that action by its author. Note that the entry data is not signed, but entries are always referenced by their hash in an action so the signature of the action covers the entry data as long as the entry hash is checked.
```

Whether an entry is included in an op depends on the type of action, content of the action and the type of op. As described for actions and records above, some actions do not have an associated entry and entries may also be hidden. The _RegisterAgentActivity_ op never carries an entry, and neither do the _RegisterDeleteRecord_ or _RegisterDeleteEntry_ types.

### Chain Operations

There are nine types of chain operations, each serving a specific purpose in the distributed data model:

> #### RegisterAgentActivity

Reviewer 3: I suggest to drop all the `Register`s from the op identifiers and rename `RegisterLink` to `CreateLink`.

The _RegisterAgentActivity_ operation is sent to the agent activity authority (agents near the agent's public key) for every action an agent commits.

**Purpose:**
- Maintain a complete activity log for each agent.
- Enable queries for all actions by a specific agent.
- Allows chain forks to be detected by agent authorities.

#### StoreRecord

The _StoreRecord_ operation is sent to the action authority (agents near the action hash) to store the complete record.

**Purpose:**
- Store the authoritative record for this action.
- Enable queries for the record by its action hash.
- Collect changes to content (updates, deletes).

#### RegisterUpdateRecord

The _RegisterUpdateRecord_ operation is sent to the action authority when a record is updated.

**Purpose:**
- Index updates with the record being updated.
- Enable queries for all updates to a specific record.

#### RegisterDeleteRecord

The **RegisterDeleteRecord** operation is sent to the action authority when an action is deleted.

**Purpose:**
- Index deletions for the action being deleted.

> - Enable queries to discover if a record has been deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enable queries for deletes to a specific record.
```

#### StoreEntry

The _StoreEntry_ operation is sent to the entry authority (agents near the entry hash) when a new entry is created.

**Purpose:**
- Store the entry content at its content-addressed location.
- Enable queries for the entry by its hash.

#### RegisterUpdateEntry

The **RegisterUpdateEntry** operation is sent to the entry authority when an entry is updated.

**Purpose:**
- Index updates for the entry being updated.
- Enable queries for all updates to a specific entry.

#### RegisterDeleteEntry

The **RegisterDeleteEntry** operation is sent to the entry authority when an action with an entry is deleted.

**Purpose:**
- Index deletions with the entry being deleted.

> - Enable queries to discover if _Create_ or _Update_ entries have been deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enable queries for all deletes to a specific entry.
```

#### RegisterLink

The _RegisterLink_ operation is sent to the link base authority when a link is created.

**Purpose:**
- Index links grouped by their base.
- Enable efficient queries for all links from a specific base

> - Provide the foundation for graph traversal and relationship queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provide the foundation for graph traversal, relationship queries, and custom indexes.
```

Author: I find the use of index a little confusing here. It doesn't really, in the sense that the underlying storage is not expected to index the links it stores for efficient retrieval. Is an index not a type of graph traversal?

Reviewer: Yep, fair

#### RegisterDeleteLink

The _RegisterDeleteLink_ operation is sent to the link base authority when a link is deleted.

**Purpose:**
- Index link deletions at the base.

> - Enable queries to filter out deleted links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enable queries to filter out deleted links, and for all delete links associated with a create link.
```
